---
title: "Can You Dungeon Master as a Beginner?"
date: 2021-11-05
draft: false
summary: "The answer is yes. You can Dungeon Master an RPG even if you're a beginner. If you're new to RPGs or to a specific RPG game-system, you can still run a game. For new and experienced DMs, when trying a new game-system, you should focus on keeping things simple."
---

Role-playing games. I *love* role-playing games. And I especially love
playing with new players. I often get asked how a beginner can run a
game, and if it can be done at all!

The answer is yes. You can Dungeon Master an RPG even if you're a
beginner. If you're new to RPGs or to a specific RPG game-system, you
can still run a game. For new and experienced DMs, when trying a new
game-system, you should focus on keeping things simple.

Actually, as an experienced Game Master, one of my biggest GMing
priorities is to keep my games simple. Let me elaborate on that,
because there area varying degrees of simplifying your game.

## Run a one-shot or a short series
When running an RPG for the first time, plan on running a one-shot or
running 3-6 sessions. Don't overcommit yourself to something that will
burn you out as a DM. Running a year-long campaign with weekly
sessions is more challenging than running a little story arc for only
a couple of sessions.

I'm partial to running one-shots. There's a lot you can learn from
running a game that's constrained to a single session. To run a
one-shot, you have to deliver an exciting story from start to finish
in a single session. I think that running one-shots can be better
practice at running RPGs than running a long-term campaign.

Committing to a short series of only a few sessions is also a good
alternative. This is great because it allows you to practice the most
common moments of a game - the beginning, middle, and end. If you try
running a campaign, you might never get practice bringing things to a
close. More importantly, you'll want to review your games to see how
you can improve them. I wouldn't place too much importance in the
quality of your first session, but a few sessions is a good place to
assess your progress. That's a perfect time to finish the game, assess
your strengths and weaknesses, and use that knowledge in your next
game.

Keep in mind that if you try running a one-shot for your first time
DMing, it might end up spilling over into another session or two. It
*is* challenging, and you won't be able to gauge how long your
encounters will take.

## Strip the rules to a manageable level
You're a new DM. There's a lot to juggle during a game, so do yourself
a favor, and simplify the game itself. Consider cutting rules that add
too much complexity for little return.

Remember that this is just a game, and we're just rolling dice, after
all. Choose how complicated you want your game to be. Your game can
have all the rules and complexities if you want, or it can be as
simple as flipping a coin to resolve things. Don't dismiss simple
rules as not being fun. [Lasers &
Feelings](http://www.onesevendesign.com/laserfeelings/) has a simple
task resolution system, and it's plenty of fun!

Things like tracking how many arrows you have left - many DMs choose
to not track arrows. It's one less thing for the players and the DM to
track, and you have to ask yourself: "is this really making my game
better?"

For me, I don't always know what will be better for my game. As a new
DM, you won't know either. When I last ran the D&D Starter Set's 'The
Lost Mines of Phandelver' for one of my groups, I had a hard time
deciding if I wanted to keep the battle-maps and dungeon-crawl style,
or if I wanted to get rid of them in hopes of speeding the game up.
Whatever you choose to do, try your best to make it work. I chose to
get rid of the battle-maps, and stuck to it. My players now have an
unforgettable experience out of that.

If you insist on playing with the rules as-written, then do a
reasonable amount of studying to make sure you know them. I personally
prefer to commit the least amount possible of my DMing resources.

## Focus on what you know and like
If you're planning on running a game, you probably have an idea of
what you like about the game. Focus on delivering *that* at the table.

If you like the idea of badass cinematic combat ala Conan the
Barbarian, make sure to keep combat concise. Run combat scenes quick
and gruesomely. Make your players feel like heroes plowing through
hordes of enemies with ease!

If you like the idea of tactical combat, make sure you have maps for
each battle with interesting set-pieces and monsters. Focus on
explaining rules only as they come up, and explain exactly which
actions/moves your enemies are making as you play them. This shows
your players the tactical intricacies of the game, and hopefully will
promote an appreciation for it. Don't slow the game down for this,
though - no one likes slow, boring combat.

If you like the idea of role-playing, make sure you have plenty of
interesting NPCs for the characters to interact with. Get into
character when the NPCs act to promote role-playing among the players!
Also come-up with interesting rooms or locations that the players can
interact with. Sit back and enjoy the show.

If you like the idea of exploring places, make sure you have plenty of
cool locations ready for your players to explore. Describe each
location in detail as they come across them. *Show* each location by
describing them with different senses to evoke feeling in your
players. Send shivers down their spines!

Whatever it is that you like about the game, focus on delivering it.
Your players will have a memorable experience as a result.

## The pitfalls to avoid
I suggest you start by running a published adventure. Or even better -
run a published adventure that you've played in. You will
significantly reduce your game prep for a first-time DM, and you'll
ensure that the story is conducive. Running published adventures still
require prep, even for experienced Game Masters, but when starting
out, they can show you how to run certain scenes properly.

As a beginner, you might not be able to put together a story/adventure
that works well at the table. I've certainly had my share of failures
trying to come up with my own adventures. However, when I run
published adventures, the success of my games is much more consistent.
Cut one more variable out of the equation - the writing. If you've
never ran a game before, prioritise learning how to run the game
before you learn how to design a game.

## Let go of your worries/doubts
Dispel any doubt that you have about running a game. It takes a lot of
effort to run a *catastrophic* failure. The odds that you run a game
so bad that you become hated for it is remote. If you run a game for
your friends, that's your first barrier keeping you from running a
catastrophic failure. Half-decent friends will love your game no
matter what and get into it just as much as you do.

What makes a terrible game doesn't usually involve how you call the
rules, or any of the game mechanics. To run a terrible game, you would
need to treat your players disrespectfully. Things like being selfish,
manipulative, and condescending are what will ruin your game. Don't
hoard all the fun - make sure everyone is having fun. Listen to your
players, and validate their concerns. If you're ignoring rules when
the other players don't want to, they'll get upset. If you listen to
them and consider playing with the rules the way they want to, you'll
validate their feelings and they'll have more fun than before. I run
my games with almost no defined rules, and my players love it. Just
start by doing what everyone at the table would think is fun.

Just try it out! You can't become a good Dungeon Master if you never
do it! Schedule a session with you friends, and with that
time-constraint, work towards delivering a simple session - that's it.
They key points for you to remember:
- Only commit to a one-shot or a few sessions. Run a game or two, and
  learn from it before you commit to something longer.
- Simplify the game. Playing with every single rule of a game-system
  might be overwhelming. Consider cutting as much as is necessary to
  keep you from referring to the rulebook during play.
- Focus on delivering what you do best. You can't be a master at
  running RPGs on the first try, so focus on performing especially
  well in one area.
- Run a published adventure. Learn to run a game before you learn to
  write one; learn to walk before you run.
- Stop worrying. Your game can't fail as badly as you think.
